"Jscex" is short for "JavaScript Computation EXpressions". It provides a monadic extensions for JavaScript language and would significantly improve your programming life in certain scenarios. The project is written in JavaScript completely, which mean it can be used in any execution engines support [ECMAScript 3](http://www.ecma-international.org/publications/standards/Ecma-262.htm), including mainstreaming browsers or server side JavaScript environments (e.g., [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/)).

Currently features:

* A JIT (just-in-time) compiler which generates codes **at runtime** - mainly used in development environment.
* An AOT (ahead-of-time) compiler which generates code **before runtime** - mainly used in production environment.
* An async library which simplied async programming significantly.

# Jscex asynchronous library

Asynchronous programming is essential, especially in JavaScript. JavaScript doesn't provide any primitives for writing codes can block the execution. Any operations which take a period of time have to be written in async ways. Async operations usually send back the results by callback functions when finished, and we could do the rest of work in the callback.

Here comes the problem. We usually express our work linearly, but async tasks with callbacks require logical division of algorithms. We cannot write conditions with <code>if</code> or loops with <code>while</code>/<code>for</code>/<code>do</code> statements. It's also very difficult to combine multiple asynchronous operations or handle exceptions and cancellation.

So Jscex comes to the rescue with its asynchronous library.

## How to use

The core feature of Jscex is a compiler which convert standard JavaScript functions into a monadic ones. The compiler consists of three parts:

* lib/json2.js: The [JSON](http://json.org/) stringifier provided by Douglas Crockfod.
* lib/uglifyjs-parser.js: The JavaScript parser of [UglifyJS](https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS) project. It's the JavaScript port of the LISP project [parse-js](http://marijn.haverbeke.nl/parse-js/).
* src/jscex.js: The implementation of Jscex JIT compiler, which produces code at runtime.

All the three files list above are uncompressed version mainly used for developement. The minified version of them are in "bin" folder, which is suitable for production use (if you're not using AOT compile mode, see the "AOT compiler" section for more detail). Furthermore, the dev version of Jscex compiler would produce programmer-friendly code, which is easily for debugging and the minified version would run a little faster.

To use the async library of Jscex, we should also load the "src/jscex.async.js" file. Now everything is prepared, here's how we compile a normal JavaScript function with async builder:

    var somethingAsync = eval("async", function (a, b) {
        // implementation
    });

Please visit the following sections for more details.

## Samples:

All the following samples can be found in samples/async folder.

### Clock:

We are going to draw a clock with HTML5 canvas on the page (samples/async/clock.html). It's rather easy for most front-end programmers:

    function drawClock(time) {
        // clear and canvas and draw a clock on it.
    }

    setInterval(1000, function () {
        drawClock(new Date());
    });

That's the implementation with callback, but in Jscex we could write code like this:

    var drawClockAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (interval) {
        while (true) {
            drawClock(new Date());
            // wait for an async operation to complete
            $await(Jscex.Async.sleep(interval));
        }
    }));

    Jscex.Async.start(drawClockAsync(1000));

We wrote an infinite loop in the async method <code>drawClockAsync</code>, in each iteration we draw a clock with current time and call <code>Jscex.Async.sleep</code> method, the sleep operation **blocks** the code for 1 seconds.

How can we block the code without the support of runtime? The magic here is: we are not actually executing the code we wrote, the <code>Jscex.compile</code> method accept the function we provide and convert it into another (it's not necessory for us to understand the code currently):

    function (interval) {
        var $_builder_$ = Jscex.builders["async"];
        return $_builder_$.Start(this, function () {
            return $_builder_$.Loop(
                function () {
                    return true;
                },
                null, 
                $_builder_$.Delay(function() {
                    drawClock(new Date());
                    return $_builder_$.Bind(Jscex.Async.sleep(interval), function () {
                        return $_builder_$.Normal();
                    });
                }),
                false
            );
        });
    }

The string form of the new function generated by Jscex compiler will be dynamicly executed by <code>eval</code> method, preserving the current scope and context (variables, closures, etc.).

The <code>$await</code> method is the "bind" operation of <code>async</code> builder, it tells the compiler to put the code after that in the callback for the builder's "Bind" method. The <code>$await</code> method accepts an async task generated by <code>Jscex.Async.sleep</code>, provides a semantic of "waiting the operation to complete".

It seems the implementation with Jscex is a bit longer in this simple case - please look at the following samples. They will tell you the real power of Jscex.

### Animations

Animations are important for rich user interfaces. Let's build an animation like "move the element from here to there in a period of time" (samples/async/move.html). The traditional version of the <code>move</code> could be:

    var moveTraditionally = function (e, startPos, endPos, duration, callback) {

        var t = 0;

        // move a bit
        function move() {
            e.style.left = startPos.x + (endPos.x - startPos.x) * t / duration;
            e.style.top = startPos.y + (endPos.y - startPos.y) * t / duration;

            t += 50;
            if (t < duration) {
                setTimeout(50, move);
            } else { // finished
                e.style.left = endPos.x;
                e.style.top = endPos.y;
                callback();
            }
        }

        setTimeout(50, move);
    }

Can someone tell me the algorithm used to move the element? Maybe we would understand the implementation after reading the code again and again, but it's really difficult and uncomfortable for the programmer to read and write codes like that. But everything would be changed with Jscex:

    var moveAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (e, startPos, endPos, duration) {
        for (var t = 0; t < duration; t += 50) {
            e.style.left = startPos.x + (endPos.x - startPos.x) * t / duration;
            e.style.top = startPos.y + (endPos.y - startPos.y) * t / duration;
            $await(Jscex.Async.sleep(50));
        }

        e.style.left = endPos.x;
        e.style.top = endPos.y;
    }));

We could express our algorithm in normal way (linearly): loop with a <code>for</code> statement, sleep for 50 milliseconds in each iteration and move the element again. It's just simple and elegant.

Now we got an async method <code>moveAsync</code>, we can use it when building another async method, just like the <code>Jscex.Async.sleep</code> method in the core library. They both return the async tasks implementing the same "async" protocal for outside. So check out the method below:

    var moveSquareAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function(e) {
        $await(moveAsync(e, {x:100, y:100}, {x:400, y:100}, 1000));
        $await(moveAsync(e, {x:400, y:100}, {x:400, y:400}, 1000));
        $await(moveAsync(e, {x:400, y:400}, {x:100, y:400}, 1000));
        $await(moveAsync(e, {x:100, y:400}, {x:100, y:100}, 1000));
    }));

We can easily find out how <code>moveSquareAsync</code> method works: it moves an element with a square routine. It's really easy to combine multiple async operations into another in Jscex.

### Sorting animations:

Every programmer learns sorting algorithms, like bubble sort:

    var compare = function (x, y) {
        return x - y; 
    }

    var swap = function (array, i, j) {
        var t = array[x];
        array[x] = array[y];
        array[y] = t;
    }

    var bubbleSort = function (array) {
        for (var x = 0; x < array.length; x++) {
            for (var y = 0; y < array.length - x; y++) {
                if (compare(array[y], array[y + 1]) > 0) {
                    swap(array, y, y + 1);
                }
            }
        }
    }

The basic idea of represent an sorting algorithm with animations is simple: repaint the graph after each swap and wait for a little time. But the implementation is not as easy as the idea looks like, we cannot use <code>for</code> loops anymore if we "stop" the code execution for some time using <code>setTimeout</code>. But let's check out the Jscex version:

    var compareAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (x, y) {
        $await(Jscex.Async.sleep(10)); // each "compare" takes 10 ms.
        return x - y;
    }));

    var swapAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (array, x, y) {
        var t = array[x];
        array[x] = array[y];
        array[y] = t;

        repaint(array); // repaint after each swap

        $await(Jscex.Async.sleep(20)); // each "swap" takes 20 ms.
    }));

    var bubbleSortAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (array) {
        for (var x = 0; x < array.length; x++) {
            for (var y = 0; y < array.length - x; y++) {
                var r = $await(compareAsync(array[y], array[y + 1]));
                if(r > 0) {
                    $await(swapAsync(array, y, y + 1));
                }
            }
        }
    }));

I belive there's no need to explain more - it's just the standard "bubble sort" algorithm. And of course we can create animation for "quick sort":

    var _partitionAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (array, begin, end) {
        var i = begin;
        var j = end;
        var pivot = array[Math.floor((begin + end) / 2)];

        while (i <= j) {
            while (true) {
                var r = $await(compareAsync(array[i], pivot));
                if (r < 0) { i++; } else { break; }
            }

            while (true) {
                var r = $await(compareAsync(array[j], pivot));
                if (r > 0) { j--; } else { break; }
            }

            if (i <= j) {
                $await(swapAsync(array, i, j));
                i++;
                j--;
            }
        }

        return i;
    }));
    
    var _quickSortAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (array, begin, end) {
        var index = $await(_partitionAsync(array, begin, end));

        if (begin < index - 1) {
            $await(_quickSortAsync(array, begin, index - 1));
        }

        if (index < end) {
            $await(_quickSortAsync(array, index, end));
        }
    }));

    var quickSortAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function (array) {
        $await(_quickSortAsync(array, 0, array.length - 1));
    }));

The complete sample is in "samples/async/sorting-animations.html". After opening the page with browser support HTML5 canvas, you can click the links to view the animation of three sorting algorithms: bubble sort, selection sort and quick sort.

### Tower of Hanoi

[Tower of Hanoi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tower_of_Hanoi) is a puzzle of moving discs. It has a simple, recursive solution:

1. move n−1 discs from A to B. This leaves disc n alone on peg A
2. move disc n from A to C
3. move n−1 discs from B to C so they sit on disc n

which in code:

    var hanoi = function (n, from, to, mid) {
        if (n > 0) hanoi(n - 1, from, mid, to);
        moveDisc(n, from, to);
        if (n > 0) hanoi(n - 1, mid, to from);
    }

    hanoi(5, "A", "C", "B");

If we need to show the algorithm in animation (samples/async/hanoi.html), we could re-write the code just like the sample above:

    var hanoiAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function(n, from, to, mid) {
        if (n > 0) {
            $await(hanoiAsync(n - 1, from, mid, to));
        }
        
        $await(moveDiscAsync(n, from, to));

        if (n > 0) {
            $await(hanoiAsync(n - 1, mid, to, from));
        }
    }));

    Jscex.Async.start(hanoiAsync(5, "A", "C", "B"));

If you open the sample page in the browser, you'll find the discs is moving one by one, resolving the puzzle automatically. Maybe it's not quite easy for someone to follow each step, so let's just make a little change:

    var hanoiAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function(n, from, to, mid) {
        if (n > 0) {
            $await(hanoiAsync(n - 1, from, mid, to));
        }

        // wait for the button's being clicked
        var btnNext = document.getElementById("btnNext");
        $await(Jscex.Async.onEventAsync(btnNext, "click"));

        $await(moveDiscAsync(n, from, to));

        if (n > 0) {
            $await(hanoiAsync(n - 1, mid, to, from));
        }
    }));

Before each <code>moveDiscAsync</code> operation, the program would wait for the button's "click" event. With Jscex async builder, **everything is async tasks**. In the example above, the button's "click" event is also an async task - the task would be finished when the button is clicked, then the program keeps going, move a disc and wait for another click.

People can write async programs without callbacks, that's how Jscex improve productivity and maintainability.

### Simple web-server with Node.js

Jscex works for any execution engines support ECMAScript 3, not only browsers but also server-side environment like node.js. Node.js is a server-side JavaScript environment that uses an asynchronous event-driven model. This allows Node.js to get excellent performance based on the architectures of many internet applications.

Here's a simple file server build with Node.js:

    var http = require("http");
    var fs = require("fs");
    var url = require("url");
    var path = require("path");

    var transferFile = function(request, response) {
        var uri = url.parse(request.url).pathname;
        var filepath = path.join(process.cwd(), uri);

        // check whether the file is exist and get the result from callback
        path.exists(filepath, function(exists) {
            if (!exists) {
                response.writeHead(404, {"Content-Type": "text/plain"});
                response.write("404 Not Found\n");
                response.end();
            } else {
                // read the file content and get the result from callback
                fs.readFile(filepath, "binary", function(error, data) {
                    if (error) {
                        response.writeHead(500, {"Content-Type": "text/plain"});
                        response.write(error + "\n");
                    } else {
                        response.writeHead(200);
                        response.write(data, "binary");
                    }

                    response.end();
                });
            }
        });
    }

    http.createServer(function(request, response) {
        transferFile(request, response);
    }).listen(8124, "127.0.0.1");

There're two async method used above: <code>path.exists</code> and <code>fs.readFile</code>. Most I/O api in Node.js are asynchronous, which brings great scalability but low programmability. But with the help of Jscex, we can write async programs as easy as normal code (samples/async/node-server.js):

    require("../../lib/uglifyjs-parser.js");
    require("../../src/jscex.js");
    require("../../src/jscex.async.js");
    require("../../src/jscex.async.node.js");

    Jscex.Async.Node.Path.extend(path);
    Jscex.Async.Node.FileSystem.extend(fs);

    var transferFileAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function(request, response) {
        var uri = url.parse(request.url).pathname;
        var filepath = path.join(process.cwd(), uri);

        var exists = $await(path.existsAsync(filepath));
        if (!exists) {
            response.writeHead(404, {"Content-Type": "text/plain"});
            response.write("404 Not Found\n");
        } else {
            var file = $await(fs.readFileAsync(filepath));
            if (file.error) {
                response.writeHead(500, {"Content-Type": "text/plain"});
                response.write(file.error + "\n");
            } else {
                response.writeHead(200);
                response.write(file.data, "binary");
            }
        }

        response.end();
    }));

    http.createServer(function(request, response) {
        Jscex.Async.start(transferFileAsync(request, response));
    }).listen(8125, "127.0.0.1");

All the Jscex files are compatible with [CommonJS](http://commonjs.org/) module specification, which can be loaded by <code>require</code> method in Node.js. Jscex async library has a simple model of "async tasks", everyone can easily write extensions/adaptors for existing async operations. The sample above uses the Node.js extensions defined in "src/jscex.async.node.js":

    Jscex.Async.Node = {};
    Jscex.Async.Node.Path = {};
    Jscex.Async.Node.FileSystem = {};

    Jscex.Async.Node.Path.extend = function (path) {

        path.existsAsync = function (filepath) {
            return {
                start: function (callback) {
                    path.exists(filepath, function (exists) {
                        callback("return", exists);
                    });
                }
            };
        };
    }

    Jscex.Async.Node.FileSystem.extend = function (fs) {
        fs.readFileAsync = function (filepath) {
            return {
                start: function (callback) {
                    fs.readFile(filepath, function (error, data) {
                        var result = { error: error, data: data };
                        callback("return", result);
                    });
                }
            };
        }
    }

Obviously, we can extend the XMLHttpRequest object to simplify the usage (src/jscex.async.xhr.js):

    XMLHttpRequest.prototype.receiveAsync = function () {
        var _this = this;
        return {
            start: function (callback) {
                _this.onreadystatechange = function () {
                    if (_this.readyState == 4) {
                        callback("return", _this.responseText);
                    }
                }

                _this.send();
            }
        };
    }

## Limitations:

There're three limitations of the current version of Jscex - none of them becomes a real problem in my experiences.

### Need separate $await statement

Jscex compiler can only handle explicit <code>$await</code> operation:

* Simple: <code>$await(...);</code>
* Assign the result to a variable: <code>var r = $await(...);</code>
* Directly return: <code>return $await(...);</code>

Other kinds of usages could not be compiled:

    f(g(1), $await(...))

    if (x > y && $await(...)) { ... }

We should put <code>$await</code> in separate statement:

    var a1 = g(1);
    var a2 = $await(...);
    f(a1, a2);

    if (x > y) {
        var flag = $await(...);
        if (flag) { ... }
    }

### Nesting Jscex functions

If you write nested Jscex functions, the inner function would not be compiled with outside one. For example:

    var outsideAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function () {

        var innerAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function () {
            // inner implementations
        }));

    }));

At runtime, <code>outsideAsync</code> would be compiled to:

    function () {
        var $_builder_$ = Jscex.builders["async"];
        return $_builder_$.Start(this, function () {

            var innerAsync = eval(Jscex.compile("async", function () {
                // inner implementations
            }));
            
            return $_builder_$.Normal();
        });
    }

which means the <code>innerAsync</code> method would be compiled each time <code>outsideAsync</code> calls. That would be a performance cost. So please DONOT put an Jscex function into another - until the problem being fixed.

### Language support:

Jscex compiler could generate code for almost all the features of ECMAScript 3 except:

* Break to label
* <code>switch</code> statment, please use if/else instead.

# AOT compiler

The AOT (ahead-of-time) compiler is a piece of JavaScript code (scripts/jscexc.js) which generates code before runtime.

## Why we need an AOT compiler.

The JIT compiler works just fine. The function would be compiled only once for each page load or node.js execution, so the performance cost of compiler is really small. And the size of compiler is only around 10K when minified and gzipped - acceptable for me.

But the problem comes with "script compressing". Normally, the script used for websites would be compressed by tools like UglifyJS, Closure Compiler or YUI compressor. Jscex compiler works fine when the compress strategy is just removing the whitespaces and shortening the name of variables, but modern compressors would rewrite the statement structures for getting minimal size:

    var bubbleSortAsync=eval(Jscex.compile("async",function(a){for(var b=0;b<a.length;b++)for(var c=0;c<a.length-b;c++){var d=$await(compareAsync(a[c],a[c+1]));d>0&&$await(swapAsync(a,c,c+1))}}))

The code above is the code of bubble sort animation compressed by UglifyJS. Please notice that Jscex cannot handle code like <code>d>0&&$await(...)</code>, so we have to compile the code before compressing. That the main reason I build an AOT compiler.

## Usage

The AOT compiler runs with node.js:

    node scripts/jscexc.js --input input_file --output output_file

For the <code>bubbleSortAsync</code> method above, it would be compiled into:

    var bubbleSortAsync = (function (array) {
        var $_builder_$ = Jscex.builders["async"];
        return $_builder_$.Start(this, function () {
            return $_builder_$.Delay(function () {
                var x = 0;
                return $_builder_$.Loop(
                    function () {
                        return x < array.length;
                    },
                    function () {
                        x++;
                    },
                    $_builder_$.Delay(function () {
                        return $_builder_$.Delay(function () {
                            var y = 0;
                            return $_builder_$.Loop(
                                function () {
                                    return y < (array.length - x);
                                },
                                function () {
                                    y++;
                                },
                                $_builder_$.Delay(function () {
                                    return $_builder_$.Bind(compareAsync(...), function (r) {
                                        return $_builder_$.Delay(function () {
                                            if (r > 0) {
                                                return $_builder_$.Bind(swapAsync(...), function () {
                                                    return $_builder_$.Normal();
                                                });
                                            } else {
                                                return $_builder_$.Normal();
                                            }
                                        });
                                    });
                                }),
                                false
                            );
                        });
                    }),
                    false
                );
            });
        });
    })

The AOT compiler would keep the code others than Jscex functions. The code generated by AOT compiler could be compiled safely. Futhermore, the compiled code could execute without "json2.js", "uglifyjs-parser.js" and "jscex.js". The async methods could be executed properly with only "jscex.async.js", which is only 1KB when gzipped.

## Limitations

...

# Beyond async

    var rangeSeq = eval(Jscex.compile("seq", function (minInclusive, maxExclusive) {
        for (var i = minInclusive; i < maxExclusive; i++) {
            $yield(i);
        }
    }));

# Jscex internals

...

# Related projects

* F#:
* C# vNext:
* UglifyJS:
* Narcissus:

# License

Jscex is released under the BSD license:

<pre>Copyright 2011 (c) Jeffrey Zhao &lt;jeffz@live.com&gt;
Based on UglifyJS (https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS).

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

    * Redistributions of source code must retain the above
      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
      disclaimer.

    * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
      disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
      provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER “AS IS” AND ANY
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER BE
LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR
TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF
THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.</pre>

\- jeffz (jeffz[at]live[dot]com)
